[Fear and Anger: how to shift out of them](https://docs.google.com/document/d/15oh13eYxxIyQoOx3_6RQCWzA6ETkxYOV_gtYMeTeBKE/edit) (2 min)

Now you know the danger of acting on the thoughts generated by fear or anger. [Fear and Anger give bad advice](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1sDWHUm6zwEGiPBQH2Ig6DDvVL-IEQSlfNeQnR2mhjmE/edit) (5 min)

### Anger

Now you have a system for knowing when you are in Anger.

- Hint: You ask those who are close to you (your colleagues, spouse, kids) to tell you when they perceive you to be in fear or Anger by saying, "I perceive you to be in fear/anger."

But how do you then shift out of Anger?

Time will often do the trick. But most of us can't afford a long time before needing our brains to function well, especially when we don't know how long it will take.

There are ways to speed the process up. Here is a very non-exhaustive list of ideas to shift out of Anger. None of these are magic pills. Each is something to experiment with. Find what works for you.

The key is to activate other parts of your brain besides your amygdala. You can do this by getting your brain to focus on something different than the singular perspective you have on this issue. Try ...

A new physical location

- If you're sitting down, stand up.
- If you're inside, go outside.

A new physical state

- If you're still, go outside and start sprinting as fast as you can for 2 minutes.

A new mental state

- If you are bombarded by continuous stimulation (as almost all of us are with constant messaging, alerts, screen time, meetings, calls, etc.), then go stimulation-free (turn off all messaging, alerts, screens, etc.). Get bored. [Restoration and Creativity: how to achieve them](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1SUU3WVCsXKBLx0IUZoz9K939khuDV5VUD7grBgJ5Wis/edit) (3 min)

A new perspective on the issue

- Do [The Work by Byron Katie](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1tFsngmRUBn8pNSprDq_h_9baq-t0IiPPhWaPBrFUA7A/edit)

Give your feelings and thoughts full expression:

- If you feel Anger, go into another room (or a car), grab a pillow and yell as loud as you can into that pillow for 30 seconds.
  - Hopefully, the distance and the pillow will muffle the sound enough that no one else will hear you. Practice this first to make sure it's the case.
- Keep a journal, and write your worst thoughts full of all the swear words in your head.

There are many other ways. These are just some things with which you can experiment. You only need one that works for you.

### Fear

Fear is less physical than anger, and therefore the shift moves are less physical and more mental. [The Work by Byron Katie](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1tFsngmRUBn8pNSprDq_h_9baq-t0IiPPhWaPBrFUA7A/edit) works well here. But for me, the most effective is to make actual predictions. “If I do this, then x will happen. And then what? And then y will happen. And then what? And then z will happen ….” I do this all the way to the end.

I then either:

1. Write it down in a Fear Journal (see under “Fear Journaling”: [Fear and Anger give bad advice](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1sDWHUm6zwEGiPBQH2Ig6DDvVL-IEQSlfNeQnR2mhjmE/edit#heading=h.boyzvkp4gl8t))

   1. I revisit later to see if the predictions came true or not. They almost never do, certainly not in the net-negative way that I predicted. Or …

2. Share my predictions with an accountability partner and ask them what predictions they make. If we make differing predictions, we make a bet.

   1. If I am the person feeling fear, I almost always lose the bet. Of course to see the results of the bet, I need to do the thing that I fear doing. That requires a push. But each time I go through this cycle, I need less and less of a push.

Once I lose such a bet or prediction, my mind starts to unwind its belief in the quality of advice that fear gives me. This is a never-ending process, however, since fear will continue to try to re-assert itself.

**⭐Interested in coaching or software to help implement the Mochary Method at your company? Please fill out our interest form [here](https://mocharymethod.typeform.com/interest), or book a discovery call with Nancy Xu [here](https://calendly.com/nancy-mm/30).**
